#Picasso with his sister Lola, 1889
Picasso was born at 23:15 on 25 October 1881, in the city of Málaga, Andalusia, in southern Spain. #[2] He was the first child of Don José Ruiz y Blasco (1838–1913) and María Picasso y López. #[14] Picasso's family was of middle-class background. #His father was a painter who specialized in naturalistic depictions of birds and other game. #For most of his life, Ruiz was a professor of art at the School of Crafts and a curator of a local museum. #[1] Ruiz's ancestors were minor aristocrats. #Picasso's birth certificate and the record of his baptism include very long names, combining those of various saints and relatives. #[a][c] Ruiz y Picasso were his paternal and maternal surnames, respectively, per Spanish custom. #The surname "Picasso" comes from Liguria, a coastal region of north-western Italy. #[16] Pablo's maternal great-grandfather, Tommaso Picasso, moved to Spain around 1807. #[16]

Picasso showed a passion and a skill for drawing from an early age. #According to his mother, his first words were "piz, piz", a shortening of lápiz, the Spanish word for "pencil". #[17] From the age of seven, Picasso received formal artistic training from his father in figure drawing and oil painting. #Ruiz was a traditional academic artist and instructor, who believed that proper training required disciplined copying of the masters, and drawing the human body from plaster casts and live models. #His son became preoccupied with art to the detriment of his classwork. #The family moved to A Coruña in 1891, where his father became a professor at the School of Fine Arts. #They stayed almost four years. #On one occasion, the father found his son painting over his unfinished sketch of a pigeon. #Observing the precision of his son's technique, an apocryphal story relates, Ruiz felt that the thirteen-year-old Picasso had surpassed him, and vowed to give up painting,[18] though paintings by him exist from later years. #In 1895, Picasso was traumatized when his seven-year-old sister, Conchita, died of diphtheria. #[19] After her death, the family moved to Barcelona, where Ruiz took a position at its School of Fine Arts. #Picasso thrived in the city, regarding it in times of sadness or nostalgia as his true home. #[20] Ruiz persuaded the officials at the academy to allow his son to take an entrance exam for the advanced class. #This process often took students a month, but Picasso completed it in a week, and the jury admitted him, at just 13. #As a student, Picasso lacked discipline but made friendships that would affect him in later life. #His father rented a small room for him close to home so he could work alone, yet he checked up on him numerous times a day, judging his drawings. #The two argued frequently. #[21]

Picasso's father and uncle decided to send the young artist to Madrid's Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando, the country's foremost art school. #[20] At age 16, Picasso set off for the first time on his own, but he disliked formal instruction and stopped attending classes soon after enrollment. #Madrid held many other attractions. #The Prado housed paintings by Diego Velázquez, Francisco Goya, and Francisco Zurbarán. #Picasso especially admired the works of El Greco; elements such as his elongated limbs, arresting colours, and mystical visages are echoed in Picasso's later work. #[22].